# wk 8 (older glibc versions < 2.32)

### thread and needle (50)
Solve:
Goal is to enter the correct heap base address. Heap base is the same as &tcache_perthread_struct because the struct is the first thing that gets allocated onto the heap. We know that when a chunk is freed into tcache bin, its second 8-byte contains &tcache_perthread_struct. Therefore, we will allocate a chunk, free it into tcache bin. Then, we will read this chunk's second 8-byte, which happens to be the "stitch length" field. Do that, turn it into a decimal integer, and in the next round of menu choice, we enter the heap base address in decimal when prompted and obtain flag!

**flag{Sew1ng_2gethr_3xpl017s!_8b4effc61ca4d86d}**

### sneaky leak (50)
Goal: 
Enter system's absolute address (ASLR on) for the flag

Solve:
First, we will free a chunk into unsorted bin such that we can read its forward (or backward) pointer for &main_arena. Having &main_arena allows us to calculate glibc_base, which we can use to calculate system's address. Which chunk to free? At index 64, it allocates a chunk of size 0x410 which is still not large enough to be placed into unsorted bin. But, at index 65, it will allocate a chunk of size 0x420, which means this chunk will get kicked into unsorted bin once freed. Our choice will be to free this chunk. So, we first allocate this chunk by choosing menu option 3 for allocate_idx, enter 65. And then, we call menu option 1 for free_idx and enter 65 when prompted for index. Next, we read the metadata by calling menu option 2 for read_idx. That gets us &main_arena. We calculate glibc_base offset using the usual equation of base = absolute - offset. And then, we calculate system's absolute address. Once we have it (in decimal), we choose menu option 4 and enter it for the flag.

flag{S1LLY_malloc_U_shuld_m3ms3t!_b42c8e1e9d720bd2}

### big msg server (150)
Solve:
printf's address is leaked to us from the start. We use that to calculate glibc base address, which allows us to find system and free hook's addresses.

Allocate four chunks, call them e --> a --> b --> c. Chunk e is at the head of the linked list and chunk c is the last. These chunks are contiguous on the heap, and we can overflow them by exploiting an overflow vulnerability within the edit() function. We choose to overflow chunk b's metadata to contain &free_hook - 8. To do that, we call edit() on chunk a, give it 0x48 bytes of junk, followed by p64(&free_hook - 8). Now, we effectively inserted a fake chunk after chunk b, because chunk b's next pointer now points to &free_hook - 8. Next, we will overwrite the value at &free_hook to be the address of system. To do that, we call edit() on index 3. This will write to the address + 8, which is &free_hook - 8 + 8 which equals &free_hook. We enter address of system. Great, now calling free() is effectively calling system(). It's time to populate the string "/bin/sh" into a chunk. We choose chunk a to contain "/bin/sh". We will call edit() on chunk e to overflow "/bin/sh" into chunk a. Finally, we call send() on chunk a (index 1), which contains our "/bin/sh" string. This will free this chunk, essentially calling system on "/bin/sh". Obtain flag!

flag{Unb0und3d_AND_0V3rfl0w1ng!_bf4a58aa92298734}

### useful msg server (150)
printf's address is leaked to us from the start. We use that to calculate glibc base address, which allows us to find system and free hook's addresses.

Allocate two chunks. Call them a --> b. Chunk a is at index 0 and chunk b at 1. Call the send() function to free all the chunks, starting from the head of the list. Tcache bin looks like: b --> a. Time to tcache poison! We will overwrite chunk b's next pointer to point to &free_hook so that we can later write &system at there. To do this, we call edit() on chunk b (index 1) and enter p64(&free_hook). Now, we can begin reallocation to get the poisoned pointer back to us. Allocate once to get back chunk b. Allocate again to get &free_hook. This is a fake chunk at index 2. We call edit() on this chunk and write address of system.  Now calling free() is effectively calling system(). Now, we edit chunk a (index 0) so that it contains the string "/bin/sh". Why chunk a? Because it's the first chunk to be freed when we call send(). Now we call send(). Chunk a is freed, which is just a call to system with the argument "/bin/sh". Obtain flag!

flag{Unb07h3r3d_AND_f0cus3d!_210df7430e34d243}




# wk 9 (newer glibc versions >= 2.32)
What's different from old glibc?
- no more free hook

### Sneaky heap leak (50)
Solve:
Allocate then free a chunk into tcache. 

We assume that because this chunk is the first thing to be allocated, its page is same as heap base. How to get its page address? Use its next pointer after it gets freed into tcache. It's safe-linked, because it's the last item in the tcache bin, its next chunk is NULL. This gives it the property that the next pointer is simply its page address. 

We choose an index that will give us a chunk of appropriate size that will get freed into tcache. We choose index =2. Allocate, free it, then allocate it. Now read it. Take those bytes, shift it to the left by 12 as per the safe-linking encryption algorithm, and that will be the page address, which we reason is the same as heap base. 

Choose menu option 4 and enter the address (in decimal) to obtain flag.

flag{s4f3_l1nk1nG_n07_s0_s4f3__!_ccf1f70fe1f567f5}

# Post Notes
## concepts
- How to leak a glibc addr, heap-style?
	- allocate a super large chunk > free it and it goes into unsorted bin 
		- Why do we need it to be in the unsorted bin?? Bc the unsorted bin's head and tail point to glibc's 
		- Note on metadata for unsorted/large/small bins: the 2nd quadword is a back pointer (cuz these bins are circular doubly-linked lists)
	- Pitfall: when you free a super large chunk that does not go into the tcache, this chunk might not go into unsorted bin. It might just be reclaimed by the heap. 
- Use-after-free
	- Free several chunks into the same bin
	- These freed chunks' metadata will contain pointers to each other
		- If you realloacate a chunk and its metadata remains unchanged, you can read its forward ptr, which is the next chunk's addr (on the heap) > you just leaked a heap addr
			- Further: if that heap addr contains data that is a glibc addr > read it > you just broke ASLR!
- Why do we care about &tcache_perthread_struct ? 
	- Significance: 
		- It's often the first thing allocated on the heap - which means it's probably on the same page (size of multiples of 0x1000) as the heap > reading the page portion of the struct's addr, we leak the heap base addr!
	- Where can we find it? 
		- When a heap chunk is freed into tcache bin, its second quad-word gets set to &tcache_perthread_struct
## solve tricks
- print() does not know the len of the thing it's printing; it relies on a null-byte terminator
	- Exploit by:
		- buffer overflow - you have two chunks. first chunk you freed and reallocated. second chunk is just kinda there. second chunk has data you wanna read. you know that they are adjacent in memory. and you have a heap buffer overflow where you can write to the first chunk and clobber the second chunk. When you print sth from the first chunk, make sure you clobber the null-byte so that the print() will continue printing - onwards including data from the second chunk. 

# Questions
- What is double-free?
	- calls free() on the same mem ptr (not set to NULL after the first free)to a heap chunk twice > mess up the chunk's metadata > potentially allows attacker to write malicious data (heap spraying, heap feng shui lmao)??? 
		- Steps:
			- allocate chunk
			- free it 1st time > mark the chunk as "available" (alters the chunk's metadata)
			- free it the 2nd time > bc chun ,
	- Effect:
		- Nulls out the second qword in a freed heap chunk that's reallocated
	- 